---
title: Orrery
subtitle: A CSS Experiment
author: zac
layout: post
permalink: orrery
comments: true
categories:
  - Code
  - Experiment
---

The orrery <a href="/#top">at the top of this site</a> is an experiment in CSS 3 
animation. *(You might need a more modern <a href="https://www.google.com/chrome/browser/desktop/index.html">browser</a> to see it in action.)* It uses
data from <a href="http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/">nasa.gov</a>
to accurately represent how planets rotate around our sun.

For performance reasons, I'm only showing the first 6 moons (Luna, Phaebos & Daemos of Mars, and Io, Ganymede, & Europa of Jupiter). They are revolving
accurately, but have been all been significantly slowed by an arbitrary amount in order to render
them visible in the animation.

<!-- more -->
<div class="anchor-offset" id="more"></div>

## Orreries

<a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Orrery">Orreries</a> are mechanical models of the solar system, intended to model how fast planets revolve around the sun. Typically they are not to scale in terms of size or distance from the sun, but rather are an attempt to achieve a highly accurate model of planetary orbit relative to each other with clockwork gearing.

<a href="#top">The orrery at the top of this page</a> is visually stylized in terms of planetary placement, orbital size, and shape &mdash; however, the planets *really do* rotate at those speeds relative to each other.

<figure><iframe width="960" height="640" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/-cquQ29Glos?rel=0&amp;controls=0&amp;autoplay=1&amp;loop=1" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe><figcaption>An old 3D Studio Max experiment, rendered with Vray.</figcaption></figure>

Orreries have been a long-held fascination of mine. I find the natural revolutions of the planets to be exquisitely beautiful. This clip is from a test render I did many years ago which shows gearing that results in a extremely accurate rotations and revolutions of the Earth, in a (virtual) mechanical model.

For my orrery, I chose to include both Pluto and Eris to show how slowly they
revolve relative to celestial bodies closer to the sun. (Tip: if you can't see some
planets, try shrinking your browser width.)

## The code

<a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">The code for
the orrery</a> is posted on github if you want to take a detailed look. Here's a brief walkthrough of the relevant bits.

The markup to generate the orbital rings and planets themselves is relatively simple. Here's all it takes for Earth &mdash; CSS takes care of the color, shape, positioning, *and* rotation animation:

{% highlight html linenos %}
<div class="earth" id="earth">
  <div class="label"><span class="symbol">♁</span>Earth</div>
  <div class="orbit">
    <div class="planet">
      <div class="satellite s_1"></div>
    </div>
  </div>
</div>
{% endhighlight %}
<div class="note">
  Full code <a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">available on github</a>.
</div>

## SCSS function calls

The adjustments to the planets were made by tweaking the following mixin calls
until the planets were sized and laid out how I wanted. I mostly eyeballed the
orbit size, position, and size of the planets by beginning with accurate numbers
and making small adjustments.

{% highlight scss linenos %}
// Build the planets
// buildPlanet($orbitSize, $orbitPos, $color, $planetSize)
.mercury { @include buildPlanet(10%,  2%, $color-2, $mercury-size / 1); }
.venus   { @include buildPlanet(16%,  3%, $color-3, $venus-size / 1); }
.earth   { @include buildPlanet(23%,  4%, $color-4, $earth-size / 1); }
.mars    { @include buildPlanet(31%,  5%, $color-5, $mars-size / 1); }
.jupiter { @include buildPlanet(40%,  6%, $color-6, $jupiter-size / 5); }
.saturn  { @include buildPlanet(50%,  7%, $color-7, $saturn-size / 5); }
.uranus  { @include buildPlanet(61%,  8%, $color-8, $uranus-size / 5); }
.neptune { @include buildPlanet(73%,  9%, $color-9, $neptune-size / 5); }
.pluto   { @include buildPlanet(86%, 10%, $color-10, $pluto-size / 0.5); }
.eris    { @include buildPlanet(100%, 11%, $color-11, $eris-size / 0.5); }
{% endhighlight %}
<div class="note">
  Full code <a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">available on github</a>.
</div>

## Mixin to build the planets

The mixin itself is fairly crude, but it essentially turns a `<div class="orbit"></div>`
into a round object using border-radius. A similarly round `::before` pseudo-element
positions the planet right on the edge of the orbit.

The reason I used nesting pseudo objects is because it simplifies the animation process by just requiring the `.orbit` element to rotate. Everything else is a child of that, so rotates freely while also following the rotation of its parent.

{% highlight scss linenos %}
@mixin buildPlanet($orbitSize, $orbitPos, $color, $planetSize) {
  $planetSize: $planetSize * 3;
  $opacity: 0.55 - ($orbitPos/100%)*2;

  width: $orbitSize;
  height: $orbitSize;
  position: absolute;
  left: $orbitPos + 26%;
  top: ($orbitPos * 3) + 48%;

  .orbit {
    width: 100%;
    padding-top: 100%;
    border-radius: 50%;
    position: relative;
    left: -50%;
    top: -50%;
    z-index: 10;
    background-color: rgba($color, $opacity);
    -webkit-animation-play-state: running;
    animation-play-state: running;
    border: 4px solid transparent;

    &:hover {
      -webkit-animation-play-state: paused;
      animation-play-state: paused;
      border: 4px solid lighten($color, 1%);
      cursor: pointer;

      .planet:before {
        border: 4px solid lighten($color, 5%);
      }
    }
  }

  .planet {
    display: block;
    width: $planetSize;
    height: $planetSize;
    position: absolute;
    left: -3px;
    top: 50%;
    z-index: 20;
    box-sizing: border-box;

    &:before {
      content: '';
      display: block;
      width: $planetSize;
      height: $planetSize;
      background-color: lighten($color, 1%);
      border-radius: 50%;
      position: absolute;
      border: 4px solid transparent;
      top: -50%;
      left: -50%;
      box-sizing: border-box;
    }
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}
<div class="note">
  Full code <a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">available on github</a>.
</div>

## The CSS animation process

As an example, here's how we get the Earth to rotate. This block of CSS is the main
engine that will rotate an object indefinitely. We'll later use the name of this keyframe animation ('year') for the 
CSS 3 `animation` property.

{% highlight scss linenos %}
// CW
@-webkit-keyframes year {
  from {
    -webkit-transform: rotate3d(0, 0, 1, 180deg);
            transform: rotate3d(0, 0, 1, 180deg);
  }
  to {
    -webkit-transform: rotate3d(0, 0, 1, -180deg);
            transform: rotate3d(0, 0, 1, -180deg);
  }
}
{% endhighlight %}
<div class="note">
  Full code <a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">available on github</a>.
</div>

This sets up how fast the planets should rotate relative to each other, modified by the `$speed` variable. The speed value was used to fine-tune the speed that the planets rotated altogether so I could adjust it easily. I included Earth as an example below.

{% highlight scss linenos %}
$speed:   8; // Increase to speed up planetary rotation

// Planetary orbital periods, modified by the $speed
// http://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/factsheet/
$earth-deg:    365.26 / $speed;

// Convert planetary orbital periods to animation timing in seconds
$earth:        #{earth-deg}s; // outputs '26.09s'; Put another way, it will take 26.09 seconds to make one revolution around the sun

// Animate planetary orbits
.earth .orbit  { -webkit-animation: year #{$earth} linear infinite;
                         animation: year #{$earth} linear infinite; }
{% endhighlight %}
<div class="note">
  Full code <a href="https://github.com/zachalbert/zachalbert.com_v6#the-orrery">available on github</a>.
</div>

## Why not use SVG animation?

The main reason for not using SVG animation is that I was trying to learn more about CSS animation performance for rotate transforms. If I do a v2 of the orrery at any point in the future, I will probably try to just create vector graphics of the planets and use an svg animation library like <a href="http://snapsvg.io/">Snap.svg</a>.

In general, the animation is very CPU intensive for rotating this many objects. I included the pause button to limit the resources the page takes up, but it's something I'd like to fix in the future.